.TH BPERF 1 "2026-04-27" "smartmet-monitor" "SmartMet Server"
.SH NAME
bperf \- offline perf profiler for smartmetd, filtered to SmartMet code
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B bperf
.RI [ \-p\  PID ]
.RI [ \-s\  SECONDS ]
.RI [ \-F\  FREQ ]
.RI [ \-o\  OUT-DIR ]
.RI [ \-\-threads\  CLASS ]
.RI [ \-\-no\-smartmet\-only ]
.RI [ \-\-keep\-perf\-data ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B bperf
is the offline companion to
.BR smtop (1)'s
live Flame view. It runs
.B perf record \-F 99 \-g \-\-call\-graph=dwarf,32768 \-p PID \-\- sleep N
against a smartmetd PID, post\-processes the captured stacks through
the same SmartMet\-only and request\-vs\-background filters smtop uses,
and writes three artifacts to
.I OUT-DIR
(default: current directory):
.IP \(bu 2
.B folded.txt
\(em Brendan\-Gregg folded\-stack format (one line per unique stack:
.IR "frame1;frame2;\&...\ count" ).
Useful as input to any other flamegraph viewer.
.IP \(bu 2
.B graph.dot
\(em GraphViz call graph; node weight is the cumulative sample count,
edge weight is the number of samples that crossed the
caller\(->callee boundary. Render with
.RB \(lq dot\ \-Tsvg\ graph.dot\ >\ graph.svg \(rq.
.IP \(bu 2
.B flame.svg
\(em self\-contained interactive flamegraph. Click any frame to zoom;
the title or
.B Esc
resets. Opens in any browser, no external JavaScript or fonts.
.PP
The default capture is
.B 30 seconds at 99 Hz with --smartmet-only on
and
.BR --threads\ all .
SmartMet\-only collapses every captured stack to its
.B SmartMet::*
frames plus at most one non\-SmartMet leaf (the syscall / libc the
SmartMet code is calling into); deeper kernel frames are dropped.
This is the view operators almost always want, because the raw flame
is dominated by libc and kernel scaffolding that crowds out the
SmartMet code being investigated.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-p \ PID
PID to profile, or a process name resolved via
.BR pgrep\ \-x .
Default: auto\-detect a single
.B smartmetd
process. Errors out clearly when none or many are found.
.TP
.BI \-s \ SECONDS
Recording duration. Default
.BR 30 .
Longer captures find slow paths; shorter captures keep overhead lower
on production hosts.
.TP
.BI \-F \ FREQ
Sample frequency in Hz. Default
.BR 99 .
Rarely worth changing.
.TP
.BI \-o \ OUT-DIR
Output directory. Default: current directory. Created if missing.
.TP
.BI \-\-threads \ CLASS
Filter stacks by thread role. One of
.BR all ,\  request ,\  background .
A stack is
.I request
when it contains
.BR SmartMetPlugin::callRequestHandler
\(em i.e. the thread was actively serving an HTTP request when sampled.
.I background
is everything else (cleanup, schedulers, cache eviction, etc.).
Classification is by stack content rather than thread name because
spine does not
.BR pthread_setname_np ;
every smartmetd thread reports
.BR comm=smartmetd
and a comm\-based filter would be useless. Default
.BR all .
.TP
.B \-\-smartmet\-only
(Default) Collapse stacks to SmartMet frames + \(<= 1 syscall / libc leaf.
.TP
.B \-\-no\-smartmet\-only
Keep raw stacks (kernel + libc + everything). Use this when investigating
a non\-SmartMet hot path (e.g. a glibc allocator pathology).
.TP
.B \-\-keep\-perf\-data
Don't delete the intermediate
.B perf.data
file. Useful for re\-running
.B perf script
with different options or for sharing the raw capture.
.SH PRE\-FLIGHT
.B bperf
checks the environment before burning capture time:
.IP \(bu 2
.B perf
must be in
.BR PATH .
Install
.B linux-tools
(RHEL/Fedora:
.BR "dnf install perf" ;
Debian/Ubuntu:
.BR "apt install linux-tools-generic" ).
.IP \(bu 2
.B kernel.perf_event_paranoid
must be \(<= 2 (or run as root). Lower with
.BR "sudo sysctl kernel.perf_event_paranoid=1" .
.IP \(bu 2
The PID must exist.
.PP
After the capture, if more than 50% of frames are
.BR [unknown] ,
.B bperf
warns that
.B smartmet-server-debuginfo
is probably missing. Install with
.BR "debuginfo-install smartmet-server" .
.SH HOW TO READ THE OUTPUT
A flamegraph stacks function calls vertically: the bottom row is the
program's entry point, each row above is a function called by the row
below, and frame
.B width
is sample count (\(ap CPU time spent in that path).
.IP \(bu 2
.B Healthy shape:
wide base, narrow tower. CPU is spread across many request paths and
no single function dominates.
.IP \(bu 2
.B Trouble pattern:
a single tall, flat\-topped column in one subtree. The flat top is
where time is actually being spent; walk down from there to its caller
to find the responsible code.
.IP \(bu 2
.B Next step:
re\-run with
.B \-\-threads request
or
.B \-\-threads background
to confirm whether the hotspot is request\-driven or background.
The Flame panel in
.BR smtop (1)
exposes the same toggles
.RB ( S
and
.BR T )
for live exploration.
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
30\-second capture of the running smartmetd, default filters:
.PP
.RS 4
bperf
.RE
.PP
60\-second capture of a specific PID, output to
.IR /tmp/bperf-out :
.PP
.RS 4
bperf \-p 12345 \-s 60 \-o /tmp/bperf\-out
.RE
.PP
Only request\-handling stacks (skip background work):
.PP
.RS 4
bperf \-\-threads request
.RE
.PP
Raw stacks for a glibc allocator investigation:
.PP
.RS 4
bperf \-\-no\-smartmet\-only \-s 60
.RE
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B SMARTMET_MONITOR_LIB_BPERF
Override the path of the Python script the wrapper executes (default
.BR /usr/share/smartmet/bperf.py ).
The wrapper falls back to a sibling
.BI ../share/smartmet/bperf.py
when run from the source tree, so this variable is rarely needed.
.TP
.B PYTHON
Override the Python interpreter (default
.BR python3 ).
On RHEL 8, the package's RPM build pins this to
.BR python3.9 .
.SH FILES
.TP
.B /usr/share/smartmet/bperf.py
Library implementing the capture, filter, and rendering pipeline.
.TP
.IB OUT-DIR /folded.txt
.TQ
.IB OUT-DIR /graph.dot
.TQ
.IB OUT-DIR /flame.svg
Outputs of one
.B bperf
run.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR smtop (1),
.BR bstat (1),
.BR perf (1),
.BR dot (1)
