.TH BSTAT 1 "2026-04-23" "smartmet-monitor" "SmartMet Server"
.SH NAME
bstat \- per\-bucket access\-log summary with Unicode sparklines
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B bstat
.RI [ \-i\  INTERVAL ]
.RI [ \-w\  WIDTH ]
.RI [ \-h\  HEIGHT ]
.RI [ \-\-ascii ]
.RI [ LOG-FILE ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B bstat
aggregates a SmartMet Server access\-log file into fixed\-width time
buckets and prints a summary table:
.IP \(bu 2
Request count, mean / max latency, mean response size, total
bandwidth, error percentage.
.IP \(bu 2
Four horizontal eighth\-block bars per row (requests, latency, size,
bandwidth) so rows can be eyeballed at a glance.
.IP \(bu 2
A TOTAL row aggregating the whole sample.
.IP \(bu 2
Four vertical sparklines (requests / latency / average size / bandwidth)
under the table, one character per time bucket.
.PP
Reads standard input when no log file is given. The log format parsed
is the one produced by
.B spine/AccessLogger.cpp
(IP, bracketed end/start timestamps, method/URL/version, status,
duration in ms, content length, etag, API key).
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-i \ INTERVAL
Time\-bucket width. One of
.BR 1s ,\  10s ,\  1m ,\  2m ,\  5m ,\  10m ,\  1h ,\  1d .
Default
.BR 1h .
.TP
.BI \-w \ WIDTH
Horizontal bar width in columns. Default
.BR 20 .
.TP
.BI \-h \ HEIGHT
Braille sparkline height in character rows. Vertical resolution per
sparkline = HEIGHT \(mu 4 dots. Default
.BR 4 .
.TP
.B \-\-ascii
Use plain ASCII rendering (\fB=\fR bars and a single dot\-ramp
sparkline row regardless of HEIGHT). Useful for grep\-friendly
output and terminals without UTF\-8 support.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B SMARTMET_MONITOR_LIB
Override the path of the shared library (default
.BR /usr/share/smartmet/bstat.sh ).
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR bchart (1),
.BR burls (1),
.BR bstatus (1),
.BR bkeys (1),
.BR smtop (1)
