.TH SMTOP 1 "2026-04-23" "smartmet-monitor" "SmartMet Server"
.SH NAME
smtop \- interactive terminal monitor for SmartMet Server
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B smtop
.RI [ options ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B smtop
is a curses dashboard that combines offline access\-log analysis with
live polling of the SmartMet admin plugin and per\-process /proc
inspection. Twelve views are rotated with
.B Tab
or each view\(aqs single\-letter mnemonic (highlighted in red in the
tab label).
.PP
Three of the views are
.I composite
\- they draw multiple panels at once on a single screen, the same way
btop composes CPU + memory + processes + network. The composites are
.B Live
(per\-plugin Graphs + per\-URL table; default startup view),
.B Health
(Caches + Services + Active in\-flight stacked), and
.B Flame
(full\-screen live flamegraph). The remaining nine views are dedicated
single\-panel views (Overview, Graphs, URLs, Caches, Services, Active,
Proc, Logs, Apikeys) for sortable / filterable interaction. Sparklines and charts use Braille glyphs by default for
2\(mu horizontal density and 4\(mu vertical resolution; pass
.B \-\-ascii
on terminals or fonts that don\(aqt render U+2800..U+28FF properly.
.PP
The URLs panel is the primary view: per\-endpoint request counts,
mean / p50 / p95 / max latency, error rate, bandwidth, and a
per\-URL latency sparkline. Press
.B Enter
to drill into a URL; the detail view shows windowed stats,
a 60\-minute latency sparkline, an exponential histogram, status
code breakdown, and the top API keys calling that URL.
.PP
Data sources run concurrently:
.IP \(bu 2
Log files given with
.BR \-l ,
tailed (\fBtail -F\fP semantics, rotation\-aware).
.IP \(bu 2
Admin\-plugin URLs given with
.BR \-u ,
polled every
.B \-n
seconds (default 2) for cache, service, active\-request and
last\-request data. Endpoint availability and frontend/backend
role are auto\-detected from
.BR ?what=list .
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-l \ PATH-OR-GLOB
Access\-log file. May be given multiple times; globs are expanded.
Defaults to
.BR /var/log/smartmet/*-access-log .
.TP
.BI \-u \ URL
Admin\-plugin base URL. Repeatable or comma\-separated; each URL
may be prefixed with a label (\fILABEL=URL\fP). Duplicate labels
are disambiguated with a trailing
.BR #N .
.TP
.BI \-n \ SECONDS
Admin\-plugin poll interval. Default 2.0 seconds.
.TP
.B \-\-no\-logs
Do not tail any log file (rely solely on admin\-plugin
.IR lastrequests ).
.TP
.B \-\-replay
On startup, read the tail of each log file (capped at
.BR \-\-replay\-bytes )
so the dashboard opens with panels populated instead of empty.
.TP
.BI \-\-replay\-bytes \ N
Maximum number of bytes to read per log file when
.B \-\-replay
is in effect. Default 256 MiB. Gzipped rotated files are read in
full regardless of this cap (gzip doesn\(aqt support cheap
seek\-to\-tail).
.TP
.B \-\-include\-rotated
When
.B \-\-replay
is in effect, also read each log file\(aqs rotated siblings — both
.IR <base>\-YYYYMMDD " (uncompressed) and"
.IR <base>\-YYYYMMDD.gz " (compressed) —"
in chronological order. When the same date is present in both states
the
.I .gz
is preferred to avoid double\-counting during a mid\-rotation window.
.TP
.BI \-\-history\-minutes \ N
Per\-minute history retention. Default 60 minutes. Raise to 1440 for
a day, 10080 for a week. Memory grows roughly linearly: ~12 KB per
minute on a 20\-plugin host, so 24 h ≈ 17 MB and 7 d ≈ 120 MB.
Combine with
.B \-\-include\-rotated
to actually retain the historical data being replayed.
.TP
.B \-\-ascii
Render charts with eighth\-block characters instead of Braille.
.TP
.B \-\-perf
Enable the perf sampler in the
.B Proc
panel. Spawns
.B perf record \-F 99 \-g \-p PID \-\- sleep 1
periodically for the focused
.B smartmetd
PID and renders top symbols + a live flamegraph. Adds ~10% CPU
overhead to the target process during the sampling second of each
cycle. Requires
.B perf
installed and either root or
.BR kernel.perf_event_paranoid \ \(<=\ 2 .
.TP
.BI \-\-perf\-interval \ SEC
Full perf cycle in seconds (record + idle remainder). Default 10.0.
.TP
.BI \-\-perf\-record\-seconds \ N
How long to record per perf cycle. Default 3 seconds. Longer recording
yields denser flamegraphs at proportionally more CPU overhead on the
target during the recording window.
.SH KEYS
.TP
.BR i " / " h " / " f " / " o " / " g " / " u " / " c " / " s " / " a " / " p " / " l " / " k
Jump to a view (composite or single-panel) by mnemonic letter
(highlighted in the tab). Composites:
.I i
Live,
.I h
Health,
.I f
Flame.
.TP
.BR Tab " / " Shift\-Tab
Next / previous panel.
.TP
.BR ? " / " F1
Toggle help overlay.
.TP
.BR Enter
Drill into the selected URL / API key.
.TP
.BR j " / " k " / " n " / " p
Next / previous entry while drilled in.
.TP
.BR /
Filter (URLs, Keys, Logs).
.TP
.BR s " / " S
Cycle sort column forward / backward.
.TP
.BR r
Reverse current sort.
.TP
.BR [ " / " ]
Shrink / grow the time window (1, 5, 15, 60 minutes).
.TP
.BR ↑ " / " ↓ " (URLs drill-in)"
Step through neighbouring URLs in the current sort order without
leaving the drill-in.
.TP
.BR n " / " N
Next / previous
.B smartmetd
PID in the Proc and Flame panels.
.TP
.BR 1 " \- " 9
Select the
.B smartmetd
PID at that index in the numbered selector at the top of the Proc
and Flame panels. The selector lists every running
.B smartmetd
process with its PID, role and full command line so frontend and
backend are distinguishable without knowing port numbers.
.TP
.BR m " / " b " / " i
Toggle time spark mean\(<>p95 / size spark mean\(<>throughput / idle
handlers shown\(<>hidden in the Graphs panel.
.TP
.BR f
Toggle inline flamegraph view (Proc panel, requires \-\-perf), or
switch to the dedicated Flame view from any other panel.
.TP
.BR ↑↓←→ " (Flame view)"
Navigate the flame tree: parent / most\-used child / previous / next
sibling at the same depth. The selected frame is drawn with reverse
video.
.TP
.BR ↑↓←→ " (Logs view)"
Cycle the focused source through the tab bar at the top of the panel.
Enter or End jumps to the live tail of the focused source.
.TP
.BR Enter " (Flame view)"
Zoom into the selected frame: it becomes the new visible root.
.TP
.BR Esc " / " u " (Flame view)"
Zoom out one level.
.TP
.BR 0 " / " Home " (Flame view)"
Reset zoom all the way back to the global root.
.TP
.BR s " (Flame view)"
Open a preset menu for the per\-cycle perf record duration:
1, 3, 5, 10, 20 or 30 seconds. The new value is picked up on the
next perf cycle without restarting smtop.
.TP
.BR e " / " E
Export the current panel to CSV / JSON under
.B $SMARTMET_MONITOR_EXPORT_DIR
(default
.BR /tmp ).
.TP
.BR q " / " Ctrl\-C
Quit.
.SH FILES
.TP
.B /var/log/smartmet/*-access-log
Default log glob when no
.B \-l
is given.
.TP
.B /usr/bin/smtop
The dashboard binary (and its
.B smartmet\-top
symlink).
.TP
.B /usr/share/smartmet/bstat.sh
Shared library sourced by the offline
.BR bstat ,
.BR bchart ,
.BR burls ,
.BR bstatus " and " bkeys
commands.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR bstat (1),
.BR bchart (1),
.BR burls (1),
.BR bstatus (1),
.BR bkeys (1)
.SH AUTHOR
Finnish Meteorological Institute.
