.TH SMWEBMON 1 "2026-05-02" "smartmet-webmon-26.5.2-2" "SmartMet Server"
.SH NAME
smwebmon \- browser dashboard for SmartMet Server
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B smwebmon
.RI [ options ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B smwebmon
is a small HTTP+JSON dashboard server, the browser-side companion to
.BR smtop (1).
It imports the same data-collection layer used by smtop \- access-log
tail, admin-plugin polling, /proc, /proc/net, /proc/vmstat, optional
journal tail \- and exposes the resulting state over HTTP for a
loopback-only browser UI.
.PP
The first release ships only the URLs panel as a web view, with
click-to-drill-down: per-window stats, latency histogram (HTML Canvas),
status-code mix, top API keys, and a 60-minute mean-latency line chart.
Remaining panels port over one at a time.
.PP
.B smwebmon
binds to 127.0.0.1 by default and has no authentication. Operators are
expected to tunnel from their workstation:
.PP
.RS
ssh \-L 8765:localhost:8765 host
.RE
.PP
then open
.B http://localhost:8765/
in any modern browser.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-\-bind " " \fIHOST:PORT\fR
Listen address. Default
.BR 127.0.0.1:8765 .
Stick to localhost; the server is unauthenticated.
.TP
.BR \-l ", " \-\-log " " \fIPATH-OR-GLOB\fR
Access-log file to tail (may be repeated; globs allowed). Default
when omitted:
.BR /var/log/smartmet/*-access-log .
.TP
.BR \-u ", " \-\-admin\-url " " \fIURL\fR
Admin-plugin base URL (may be repeated, or comma-separated). Each URL
may be prefixed
.IR LABEL=URL .
When omitted,
.B smwebmon
auto-probes
.B http://localhost:8080/admin
(frontend) and
.B http://localhost:8081/admin
(backend) at startup and registers whichever responds. Pass
.B \-\-no\-admin
to disable the auto-probe.
.TP
.B \-\-no\-admin
Skip the localhost auto-probe. Useful when
.B smwebmon
is run on a host that doesn\(aqt run SmartMet locally (e.g. analysing
copied access logs only) so the probe doesn\(aqt waste a second on
unreachable ports.
.TP
.BR \-n ", " \-\-admin\-interval " " \fISEC\fR
Admin-plugin poll interval in seconds. Default
.BR 2.0 .
.TP
.B \-\-no\-logs
Don\(aqt tail any log file (use admin
.B /lastrequests
instead).
.TP
.BR \-\-replay " / " \-\-no\-replay
On startup, read the tail of each log file so the URLs panel comes up
populated instead of empty. \fBDefault ON\fR; pass \-\-no\-replay to
opt out.
.TP
.BR \-\-replay\-bytes " " \fIN\fR
Maximum bytes to read per log file when
.B \-\-replay
is set. Default 1 GB.
.TP
.B \-\-include\-rotated
With
.BR \-\-replay ,
also read each log\(aqs rotated siblings (e.g.
.IR wms-access-log-20260424.gz ).
.TP
.BR \-\-history\-minutes " " \fIN\fR
Per-minute history retention. Default 1440 (24 h).
.TP
.BR \-\-journal\-unit " " \fIUNIT\fR[\fB,\fIUNIT\fR...]
systemd unit(s) to follow as a [journal] source. Comma-separated
for multiple units; lines from all of them are merged into one
timestamp-ordered stream. Default
.BR smartmet-backend,smartmet-frontend
\(em the two SmartMet daemons that may coexist on the same host
(the data-serving backend and the Sputnik routing frontend).
Pass an empty string to disable.
.TP
.BR \-\-asset\-root " " \fIPATH\fR
Override the static-asset directory. Default search order:
.BR $SMARTMET_WEBMON_ASSETS ,
sibling
.IR share/smartmet/webmon/ ,
.IR /usr/share/smartmet/webmon/ .
.TP
.BR \-\-perf " / " \-\-no\-perf
Enable the perf samplers behind the Flame panel: on-CPU
.RB ( "perf record" ),
off-CPU
.RB ( offcputime-bpfcc ),
page-fault, wakeup, block-I/O, plus the
.BR biolat ,
.BR runqlat ,
and
.B perfstat
host-wide samplers. Same scope as
.BR smtop \ \-\-perf .
\fBDefault ON\fR; pass \-\-no\-perf to opt out. Requires
.B perf
installed and
.BR kernel.perf_event_paranoid \ \(<=\ 2
(the RHEL default).
.B bcc-tools
is recommended for off-CPU; the panel falls back gracefully when it
is missing.
.TP
.BI \-\-perf\-interval \ SEC
Full perf cycle in seconds (record + idle remainder). Default 10.0.
.TP
.BI \-\-perf\-record\-seconds \ N
Seconds to record per perf cycle. Default 3. Combined with the
default
.B \-\-perf\-interval=10
the duty cycle on the target
.B smartmetd
process is ~30%.
.TP
.BR \-\-malloc\-flame " " [ \fIMIN_BYTES\fR ]
Enable the per-allocation flame graph. \fBNot for production\fR —
uprobe\-on\-malloc has measurable allocator overhead on a busy
server. Default OFF; turn on explicitly. \fIMIN_BYTES\fR caps which
allocations are traced (default 4096 when the flag is given without
a value).
.SH COSTS AND POLICY
.B smwebmon
is shipped as a systemd unit but
.B disabled by default.
The cost analysis (~100 MB RSS, ~5 % of one core, ~43 200 admin-plugin
requests/day per host at the default 2 s poll interval) was judged
small but not free, and the operator-on-demand model fits the way the
companion
.B smtop
is already used. To launch:
.PP
.RS
sudo systemctl start smartmet-webmon
.RE
.PP
The unit runs as user
.B smartmet-server
\- the same user that owns the smartmetd processes \- so the
.RB ( "kernel.perf_event_paranoid=2" )
constraint that perf can only profile processes you own is
satisfied without requiring root, and access logs are readable
without ACL trickery. Override via a drop-in
.RB ( "sudo systemctl edit smartmet-webmon" )
if your deployment uses a different operator account.
All Flame panel modes (on-CPU, off-CPU, page-fault, wakeup,
block-I/O) and the Proc panel's perfstat numbers need either a
lower
.B kernel.perf_event_paranoid
than the RHEL default (2) or
.B CAP_SYS_ADMIN
on the unit. See
.I /usr/share/doc/smartmet-monitor/perf-event-paranoid.md
for the per-feature compatibility table and recommended sysctl
values per host class.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /usr/share/smartmet/webmon/
Static HTML, CSS and JS served by the dashboard.
.TP
.I /etc/sysconfig/smartmet-webmon
Options passed to
.B smwebmon
by the systemd unit.
.TP
.I /usr/lib/systemd/system/smartmet-webmon.service
The systemd unit file.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR smtop (1),
.BR bstat (1),
.BR bperf (1),
.BR systemctl (1).
